Blog: What to do when product velocity breaks the speed of adoption (#14220)
PostHog/posthog.com: contents/newsletter/when-product-velocity-breaks-speed-of-adoption.md

- Use entertainment and brand as force multipliers. [Humor](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLnOY1RYHjDfxcuWI_L1xwuhoXAsxR59VL), [absurdity](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EXisgy6eWJ0&list=PLnOY1RYHjDfw2joBxUPADaadeX5IradbH&index=4), and narrative work because they lower the cost of paying attention

- Invite people to try things before they’re “ready,” so early adopters create buzz and pull others in organically

- [Partner with influencers](https://www.linkedin.com/feed/update/urn:li:activity:7401713037386379265) and brands who own mindshare and trust with your ICP

- [Design a world](https://www.linkedin.com/posts/lottiecoxon_i-was-unsure-how-to-promote-that-we-are-now-activity-7368966636244049920-S3mU) (not a marketing funnel) that people want to live in, and let them [explore it](https://x.com/MichaelAshmead/status/1966136656265687134) when they have the context to care

> - If you’re doing founder-led marketing, be consistent and ruthlessly [commit to the bit](https://www.linkedin.com/in/j-hawkins/)

Reviewer: Just for the sake of brevity, I say drop this one/combine it with "Use entertainment and brand as force multipliers." 

You have a lot of points here, it's a bit overwhelming.

The goal isn’t to explain everything up front. It’s to surface the right thing at the moment a user is already trying to do the related job. Discovery that’s timed to intent beats marketing that’s loud but premature.

**What failure looks like:**

- Treating external platforms as your main discovery engine ([every marketing channel sucks right now](https://andrewchen.substack.com/p/every-marketing-channel-sucks-right))

- Overindexing on Product Hunt, G2, and Hacker News (it probably isn't [worth the investment](https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=29864157)) 

- Your sales and marketing producing lengthy demo videos that explain everything and persuade no one

- Email blasting users a generic monthly product update without meaningful [segmentation](https://www.reforge.com/blog/what-is-user-segmentation) or timing

- Disrupting the in-app ([user experience](/blog/redesigned-nav-menu)) with too many tooltips, banners, modals and popups

- Overemphasizing what your shipped instead of why it matters ([marketing features > benefits](https://posthog.com/newsletter/marketing-for-devs) works for developers, but too much focus on “what” makes adoption someone else’s problem)

> >Atlassian famously struggled with feature sprawl across Jira, Confluence (and much more). Users just couldn't keep up with so much surface area. The solution wasn't _more_ marketing, it was investing heavily in in-product discovery, clearer use-case documentation, and opinionated defaults to guide users to success.

Reviewer: Should this be at the end of the section like the Notion example?

**Do this instead:**

> - Define [activation criteria](/product-engineers/activation-metrics) for new products, and track user behavior over time

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Define [activation criteria](/product-engineers/activation-metrics) for new products and build features to improve it
```

> - Anchor new features to a task or process users already care about (“you’re using X, so we think you might be interested in Y”)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Anchor new features to a task or process users already care about. Use emails and tooltips too tell them “you’re using X, so we think you might be interested in Y.”
```

- Encourage engineers to [do support](/newsletter/engineers-do-support) and see first-hand where users get stuck

- Embed docs within your product to keep users in flow (linking to an external help center is a form of context switching)

- Leverage habit loops (trigger → action → reward → reinforcement) and other [PLG](https://productled.com/blog/product-led-growth-framework-for-saas-companies) tactics to keep users engaged

> - Commit to [continuous discovery](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9RFaz9ZBXpk) - let user feedback and behavior influence what gets amplified next

Reviewer: Combine this one with support for brevity?

### 3. Measure learning, not just usage

Product adoption isn’t about people using features, it’s about them getting better at their jobs because those features exist. That’s why a lot of PostHog's content marketing isn’t really about PostHog at all – it’s about [how to be a better product engineer](https://newsletter.posthog.com/). 

**What failure looks like:**

- Overemphasizing vanity metrics like clicks, impressions, and daily active users (DAU)

> - Incentivizing your product team to be a [feature factory](https://xenoss.io/blog/product-velocity-trap-solutions) instead of taste makers

Reviewer: A bit too conceptual as it is.

- Publishing content that only talks about your product, and lacks the context, community, and problems your users actually think about

- Believing other people care about your product as much as you do (they don’t)

**Do this instead:**

- Publish [learnings](/blog/correct-llm-code-generation), and durable mental models that are useful with or without your product 

- Be open source (if you can) and build a community around it

> - Teach the domain you operate in — not just how your product works (e.g. Figma teaches people how to be [better designers](https://www.figma.com/blog/insights/))

Reviewer: Could combine this one with the first point.

---

Is it possible to ship too much – or too fast?

Yes. Probably. Unfortunately.

What used to take a full product org can now be done by a handful of people with good judgment and a lot of tokens. As a result, software powered by LLMs is [cheaper to build](https://martinalderson.com/posts/has-the-cost-of-software-just-dropped-90-percent/) and [scaling faster](https://smartdev.com/ship-product-faster-with-ai-real-data/) than at any point in history.

Take our team at PostHog. With dozens of engineering teams shipping independently, product velocity is extremely high. Once you cross a certain threshold however, that velocity stops compounding and starts competing with itself.

![product marketing at PostHog](https://res.cloudinary.com/dmukukwp6/image/upload/the_office_meme_a199c5af0a.png)

## When you ship fast enough, user attention becomes the bottleneck

Since PostHog is a work tool – not a [lifestyle brand](/merch) – even our most enthusiastic users won’t adopt an infinite number of new things per week. 

In practice, B2B SaaS users tend to adopt:
- one big new thing every few months
- a couple of medium improvements

> - a handful of small quality-of-life upgrades

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In practice, B2B SaaS users tend to adopt:

- One big new thing every few months
- A couple of medium improvements
- A handful of small quality-of-life upgrades
```

Everything else gets ignored until someone explains why it matters. 

Luckily, someone has already figured out how to optimize for this problem in manufacturing and we can apply the same ideas to your startup.

This simple principle comes from the **Theory of Constraints** (TOC):

> When upstream output increases without increasing downstream capacity, the system destabilizes.

In our case:

**Upstream**, we have:

- 39 small teams [working asynchronously](/newsletter/how-we-work-async)
- very high shipping velocity
- AI accelerating individual productivity

**Downstream**, we have:

- user attention (do they notice?)
- user comprehension (do they understand?)
- user engagement (do they care?)

> When input exceeds the capacity of the bottleneck, a few predictable things happen:

Reviewer: Trying to tighten this up and emphasize bottleneck and TOC
```suggestion
Everything else gets ignored until someone explains why it matters. This is a classic bottleneck.

Luckily, bottlenecks have solutions. Manufacturers discovered this and crystallized it in a concept called **Theory of Constraints** (TOC). There's one principle of TOC that is particularly relevant here:

> When upstream output increases without increasing downstream capacity, the system destabilizes.

In our case:

- **Upstream** we have 39 small teams [working asynchronously](/newsletter/how-we-work-async), shipping at a high velocity, and AI accelerating individual productivity.
- **Downstream** we have limited user attention, comprehension, and engagement capacity.

TOC can again help us understand the consequences of this mismatched capacity:
```

Users struggle to keep up with what’s changed. Support and sales spend more time explaining context. Marketing lags releases instead of amplifying them.

### 3. Quality degradation

When a bottleneck is overloaded, quality degrades through forced tradeoffs. 

In software, that shows up as:
- partial adoption instead of full behavior change
- misunderstood capabilities
- features used narrowly when they were designed to be foundational

Your product keeps getting bigger and better, but not proportionally clearer.

## Does that mean you should slow down?

No. Maybe? Definitely not.

Slowing down is what companies do when they run out of ideas (and clearly that's not the problem). Fortunately, the Theory of Constraints is quite explicit about what _not_ to do here:

> Improving non-bottlenecks is a waste of resources. You improve the system by elevating the bottleneck.

You could market harder. Push more announcements. Buy more attention. Top-of-funnel always looks good on a dashboard. But adoption still happens one human at a time, and each individual user has a finite amount of mental bandwidth.

So the real question isn't whether to slow down. It's this:

> How do you elevate adoption without killing velocity? (and without [losing your edge](/newsletter/how-startups-lose-their-edge)).

Reviewer: I think let's just drop the extra bit to make this really stand out.
```suggestion
**How do you elevate adoption without killing velocity?**
```

> ## How to address the real bottleneck of user attention

Reviewer: Basically I think all of these points and examples are great, but there is a bit of context missing from helping them really shine if that makes sense.

If you’re building anything serious (and using AI to increase throughput), you’ll hit this wall eventually.  

We’re still figuring out what to do about it at PostHog, but directionally this is where the work needs to shift:

> ### 1. Treat attention like a scarce resource (because it is)

Reviewer: I think the title and first paragraph of this section are great. 

One challenge I'm having is the bullets are sort of saying "don't do product marketing, do brand marketing instead."

I'm wondering if there's more context we could add around how to do product marketing well in this sort of environment. How do you promote specific features/products when users have limited attention? Not at all? We still do launches for PostHog AI, how did we think about that?

Small teams will naturally optimize for their own product space, but suboptimally for users’ overall cognitive bandwidth. Marketing everything as soon as it’s shipped turns internal velocity into competition for the same slice of user attention (and everyone loses).

**What failure looks like:**

- Creating elaborate campaigns for every new feature

> - Not having a [launch tier framework](https://aakashgupta.medium.com/the-launch-tier-system-that-transforms-product-teams-fddbb55a785c)

Reviewer: I'm wondering if this is just an "instead" point. All other points are behavior is the people actually do, but this one is an absence of something making it feel a bit out of place.

**What failure looks like:**

- Treating external platforms as your main discovery engine (performative presence on Product Hunt, G2, Hacker News may not be [worth it](https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=29864157)) 

- Relying on social media and emails broadcasts to communicate everything you shipped this week

- Disrupting the in-app experience with too many tooltips, banners, modals and popups

- Adding so much to the UI that it subtracts from [user experience](/blog/redesigned-nav-menu)

**Instead:**

- Define [activation criteria](/product-engineers/activation-metrics) for new products, and track user behavior over time

- Leverage AI to surface features when a user is already doing the related job

- Embed docs within your product to keep users in flow (linking to an external help center is a form of context switching)

- Leverage habit loops (trigger → action → reward → reinforcement) and other [PLG](https://productled.com/blog/product-led-growth-framework-for-saas-companies) tactics to keep users engaged

> - Commit to [continuous discovery](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9RFaz9ZBXpk). Let user feedback and behavior influence what gets amplified next

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Defining [activation criteria](/product-engineers/activation-metrics) for new products, and track user behavior over time

- Leveraging AI to surface features when a user is already doing the related job

- Embedding docs within your product to keep users in flow (linking to an external help center is a form of context switching)

- Leveraging habit loops (trigger → action → reward → reinforcement) and other [PLG](https://productled.com/blog/product-led-growth-framework-for-saas-companies) tactics to keep users engaged

- Committing to [continuous discovery](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9RFaz9ZBXpk). Let user feedback and behavior influence what gets amplified next
```

### 4. Measure learning, not just usage

Adoption doesn’t really start with features. It starts with people getting better at their jobs. That’s why a lot of our marketing content isn’t really about PostHog at all – it’s about [how to be a better product engineer](https://newsletter.posthog.com/). 

**What failure looks like:**

- Overemphasizing vanity metrics like clicks, impressions and daily active users (DAU)

- Incentivizing your product team to be a [feature factory](https://xenoss.io/blog/product-velocity-trap-solutions) instead of taste makers

- Publishing content that only talks about your product – instead of the market, community, and problems your users actually think about

- Believing other people care about your product as much as you do (they don’t)

> **Instead:**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Do this instead:**
```

- Teach others about your domain (Hubpsot teaches you how to be a [better marketer](https://blog.hubspot.com/), Figma teaches you how to be a [better designer](https://www.figma.com/blog/insights/))

- Share uncomfortable things like [postmortems](/blog/nov-24-shai-hulud-attack-post-mortem) for incidents 

- Be a good citizen, [create space](/handbook/people/hogpatch) for others to thrive, help developers (or whichever community you market to) without asking for anything in return

- Turn internal knowledge into [public artifacts](/handbook) and give space for every role to author content that matters to them

## Fast, not frantic

It's tempting to treat “shipping too fast” as a humblebrag, but that’s lazy thinking. If users can’t adopt what we ship, it’s not velocity – it’s waste.

Practically, that means we need to be explicit about what matters, get better at sequencing the big launches, make a select number of things very loud, and let everything else be quietly excellent. 

> And of course, do more things that would make a normal SaaS company nervous. Not everyone will like it, and that’s what makes velocity convert to value.

Reviewer: Combining the last two paragraphs as I don't fully understand what you mean in the last one. 
```suggestion
Practically, that means we need to be explicit about what matters, doing things that would make normal SaaS companies nervous, get better at sequencing the big launches, make a select number of things very loud, and let everything else be quietly excellent. Doing this right helps velocity convert to value.
```
